>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MARCH 12:
REPUBLICAN INFIGHTING OVER THE
PLAN TO REPLACE OBAMACARE.
THE NETHERLANDS PREPARES TO PICK
A NEW LEADER.
WILL THE ANTI-IMMIGRANT
NATIONALIST CANDIDATE PREVAIL?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
PRESIDENTIAL SECRECY THROUGH
HISTORY.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE WHITE HOUSE AND REPUBLICAN
CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS ARE
PUSHING BACK ON OPPOSITION TO
THEIR PLAN TO REPEAL AND REPLACE
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT-- BOTH
FROM DEMOCRATS AND FROM WITHIN
THEIR OWN PARTY.
THE LAW SIGNED BY PRESIDENT
OBAMA HAS COVERED 20 MILLION
PREVIOUSLY UNINSURED AMERICANS
THROUGH THE EXPANSION OF THE
MEDICAID PROGRAM FOR LOW-INCOME
AMERICANS AND INCOME-BASED
PREMIUM SUBSIDIES FOR OTHERS.
THERE ARE AT LEAST TWO
FUNDAMENTAL DISAGREEMENTS SOME
REPUBLICANS HAVE WITH THE PLAN.
GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH OF OHIO
SAYS THE HOUSE BILL WILL FALL
SHORT OF THE CARE AVAILABLE
TODAY.
OHIO IS ONE OF 31 STATES THAT
EXPANDED MEDICAID.
>> IF YOU'RE DRUG-ADDICTED, IF
YOU'RE MENTALLY ILL, YOU HAVE TO
CONSISTENTLY SEE THE DOCTOR.
FROM WHAT I SEE IN THIS HOUSE
BILL, THE RESOURCES ARE NOT
THERE.
IF YOU'RE CHRONICALLY ILL,
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE TO HAVE
CONSISTENT COVERAGE.
UNDER THIS BILL, YOU DON'T HAVE
IT.
>> Sreenivasan: THEN THERE ARE
REPUBLICANS LIKE SENATORS RAND
PAUL AND TOM COTTON, WHO SAY THE
PLAN IS TOO SIMILAR TO OBAMACARE
AND WON'T DO ENOUGH TO BRING
COSTS DOWN.
>> I THINK IT'S BASICALLY
OBAMACARE LITE.
KEEPS THE SUBSIDIES, KEEPS THE
TAXES FOR A YEAR, THEN KEEPS THE
CADILLAC TAX FOREVER, THE TAX ON
GOOD INSURANCE.
KEEPS THE INDIVIDUAL MANDATE.
>> Sreenivasan: PART OF SPEAKER
OF THE HOUSE PAUL RYAN'S
RESPONSE IS THAT THE HOUSE BILL
WILL DECREASE COSTS BY REPLACING
SUBSIDIES TO BUY INSURANCE WITH
AGE-BASED TAX CREDITS, AND
REPLACING MEDICAID EXPANSION
WITH BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES.
>> WE'RE TAKING ONE ENTITLEMENT
THAT'S GOING BANKRUPT--
MEDICAID, WHERE MORE AND MORE
LOW INCOME PEOPLE DON'T EVEN GET
ACCESS TO A DOCTOR-- AND WE'RE
GIVING IT BACK TO THE STATES, SO
THAT THEY CAN EXPERIMENT AND
INNOVATE AND MAKE IT WORK BETTER
FOR LOW INCOME CITIZENS.
>> Sreenivasan: TRUMP BUDGET
DIRECTOR MICK MULVANEY SAID
TODAY TOO MANY AMERICANS WITH
PRIVATE INSURANCE ARE FACING
ANNUAL DEDUCTIBLES THAT EXCEED
THEIR MEDICAL BILLS.
>> DO YOU THINK THEY COULD
AFFORD TO GO TO THE DOCTOR?
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO FIX.
NOT COVERAGE FOR PEOPLE, NOT
COVERAGE THEY CAN AFFORD, BUT
CARE THEY CAN AFFORD.
WHEN THEY GET SICK, THEY CAN GO
TO THE DOCTOR.
THAT'S WHAT THE DONALD TRUMP
PLAN IS WORKING ON, AND THAT'S
WHERE WE THINK IT'S GOING TO BE
WILDLY SUCCESSFUL.
>> Sreenivasan: INDEPENDENT
SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS-- WHO
CAUCUSES WITH THE DEMOCRATS--
SAID TODAY THE REPUBLICAN PLAN
WON'T REDUCE OUT OF POCKET COSTS
FOR MOST AMERICANS AND WILL CUT
ACCESS FOR SOME.
>> THEY'RE GONNA DEFUND PLANNED
PARENTHOOD, DENY OVER TWO
MILLION WOMEN THE RIGHT TO
CHOOSE THE HEALTH CARE THAT THEY
NEED, THEY'RE GONNA DECIMATE
MEDICAID, WHICH IS WHY THE
AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION--
THE AMA-- AND THE AMERICAN
HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION ARE OPPOSED
IN ADDITION TO THE AARP.
THIS IS A DISGRACE.
>> Sreenivasan: SENATE ARMED
SERVICES COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN JOHN
MCCAIN CALLED ON PRESIDENT TRUMP
TODAY TO PROVIDE PROOF OF HIS
UNSUBSTANTIATED TWITTER CLAIM
THAT FORMER PRESIDENT OBAMA
BUGGED TRUMP TOWER LAST YEAR.
>> PRESIDENT TRUMP HAS TO
PROVIDE NOT JUST THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE BUT THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE WITH EVIDENCE
THAT HIS PREDECESSOR FORMER
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
WAS GUILTY OF BREAKING THE LAW
BECAUSE OUR DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE GENERAL CLAPPER
TESTIFIED THAT THERE WAS
ABSOLUTELY NO TRUTH TO THAT
ALLEGATION.
SO I THINK THE PRESIDENT HAS ONE
OF TWO CHOICES EITHER RETRACT OR
TO PROVIDE THE INFORMATION THAT
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE DESERVE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HOUSE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE HAS ASKED
THE WHITE HOUSE TO PROVIDE ANY
EVIDENCE OF THE ALLEGATIONS BY
TOMORROW.
AMERICAN-BACKED IRAQI FORCES
HAVE COMPLETELY SURROUNDED
MOSUL, IRAQ'S SECOND-LARGEST
CITY, ACCORDING TO A SPECIAL U-S
ENVOY FOR THE GLOBAL COALITION
AGAINST ISIS.
IN BAGHDAD TODAY, BRETT MCGURK
SAID ALL WAYS OUT OF MOSUL FOR
ISIS FIGHTERS ARE BLOCKED.
AN IRAQI GENERAL SAID TODAY
TROOPS HAD RETAKEN A THIRD OF
WEST MOSUL, AFTER TAKING EAST
MOSUL IN JANUARY IN THE
OFFENSIVE THAT BEGAN LAST
OCTOBER.
AS MANY AS 600,000 CIVILIANS ARE
BELIEVED TO BE TRAPPED IN THE
CITY.
A JIHADIST GROUP LINKED TO AL
QAEDA IS CLAIMING RESPONSIBILITY
FOR YESTERDAY'S TWIN SUICIDE
BOMBINGS IN THE SYRIAN CAPITAL
OF DAMASCUS.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAID TODAY THE DEATH TOLL
HAS RISEN TO AT LEAST 74 PEOPLE.
THE MAJORITY WERE IRAQI PILGRIMS
VISITING SHIITE SHRINES.
THE GROUP SAID ONE EXPLOSION WAS
A ROADSIDE BOMB, THE OTHER A
SUICIDE ATTACKER.
TWO DAYS AFTER SOUTH KOREA'S
CONSTITUTIONAL COURT REMOVED HER
FROM OFFICE FOR A CORRUPTION
SCANDAL, FORMER SOUTH KOREAN
PRESIDENT PARK GEUN-HYE LEFT THE
PRESIDENTIAL MANSION.
HUNDREDS OF SUPPORTERS CHEERED
PARK WHEN SHE ARRIVED AT HER
RESIDENCE IN ANOTHER PART OF
SEOUL TODAY.
PROTESTING HER INNOCENCE, PARK
SAID IN A WRITTEN STATEMENT,
QUOTE, "I BELIEVE THE TRUTH WILL
CERTAINLY COME OUT."
AS A PRIVATE CITIZEN, SHE COULD
YET FACE CRIMINAL CHARGES,
INCLUDING EXTORTION, BRIBERY,
AND ABUSE OF POWER.
A HUGE GARBAGE DUMP IN ETHIOPIA
COLLAPSED TODAY, CLAIMING AT
LEAST 46 LIVES, MOST OF THEM
WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
THE VICTIMS ARE SAID TO HAVE
LIVED IN MUD AND STICK HOMES ON
THE MAIN LANDFILL FOR THE
CAPITAL OF ADDIS ABABA, A CITY
OF FOUR MILLION.
DOZENS MORE PEOPLE ARE MISSING.
OFFICIALS DON'T KNOW WHAT
TRIGGERED THE LANDSLIDE.
READ ABOUT THE DATA BEHIND
TERRORISM CONVICTIONS IN THE
UNITED STATES.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: TENSIONS BETWEEN
TURKEY AND THE NETHERLANDS
CONTINUE TO RISE.
TODAY THE FOREIGN MINISTER OF
TURKEY CALLED THE NETHERLANDS"
THE CAPITAL OF FASCISM" FOR
BLOCKING HIS PLANNED VISIT.
HE WANTED TO ADDRESS TURKS
LIVING IN HOLLAND ELIGIBLE TO
VOTE IN NEXT MONTH'S REFERENDUM
IN TURKEY.
LAST NIGHT, DUTCH POLICE
ARRESTED A DOZEN PEOPLE AND USED
WATER CANNON TO DISPERSE
HUNDREDS OF TURKS PROTESTING THE
BAN, NEAR THE TURKISH CONSULATE
IN ROTTERDAM.
DUTCH PRIME MINISTER MARK RUTTE
SAID TODAY HE WANTS TO CALM THE
PROTESTS AND DIPLOMATIC DISPUTE,
JUST THREE DAYS BEFORE NATIONAL
ELECTIONS IN THE NETHERLANDS.
SEEKING A THIRD TERM, RUTTE'S
STIFFEST CHALLENGE COMES FROM
FAR-RIGHT NATIONALIST CANDIDATE
GEERT WILDERS, WHO HAS CALLED
FOR BANNING MUSLIM IMMIGRANTS
AND ASYLUM SEEKERS.
>> IF YOU BELIEVE, AND CERTAINLY
MANY PEOPLE DO, MY PARTY DOES,
THAT ISLAM AND FREEDOM ARE
INCOMPATIBLE, THEN BY ALLOWING
MORE ISLAM INTO YOUR COUNTRY, AT
THE END OF THE DAY, IT WILL COST
YOU YOUR CONSTITUTION YOUR
FREEDOM AND YOUR RULE OF LAW.
>> Sreenivasan: 850,000 MUSLIMS
LIVE IN THE NETHERLANDS, ABOUT
5% OF THE POPULATION.
AN IMAM IN ROTTERDAM DISMISSED
WILDERS'S RHETORIC.
>> IT'S NOT REALISTIC.
IT IS NOT SOMETHING WHAT WE SEE,
WHAT WE NEED TO HAVE HERE IN OUR
SOCIETY.
IT'S ONLY A KIND PROPAGANDA, A
KIND OF WAYS TO GET MORE VOTES.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ON THE
NETHERLANDS ELECTION, I AM
JOINED VIA SKYPE FROM
AMSTERDAM NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM
BRABANT.
MALCOLM, WE DON'T USUALLY PAY
ATTENTION IN THE UNITED STATES
TO ELECTIONS IN THE NETHERLANDS.
WHY IS THIS ONE SO SIGNIFICANT?
>> WELL, THIS IS FIRST OF THREE
IMPORTANT EUROPEAN ELECTIONS
TAKING PLACE THIS YEAR.
THE OTHERS TAKING PLACE IN
FRANCE AND GERMANY AND WHAT
EVERYBODY'S WAITING TO SEE CAN
WHETHER OR NOT THE CONTINUATION
OF THIS ANTIESTABLISHMENT VOTES
VOTE, THE NATIONALISTIC VOTE
THAT BEGAN WITH BREXIT LAST YEAR
IS GOING TO CONTINUE HERE.
THE MAIN CONTENDER IS A MAN BY
THE NAME OF GERT WILDERS, HE IS
A VERY STRONG ANTI-ISLAMIST.
CAMPAIGNING ON THAT PARTICULAR
ISSUE.
>> Sreenivasan: EVEN IF HE HAS
TO WIN THE MOST VOTES THERE HAS
TO BE A COALITION GOVERNMENT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE PRIME MINISTER RUTTE, HAS
BEEN WILDER HAS BEEN DROPPING
VOTES IN THE PAST FEW DAYS,
ACCORDING TO THE OPINION POLLS
AND AS WE'VE SEEN THROUGHOUT ALL
THE RECENT ELECTION THE OPINION
POLLS ARE SOMETHING THAT YOU
CAN'T TRUST.
AND THE INDICATION IS THERE ARE
LOTS OF PEOPLE WHO SUPPORT HIS
FREEDOM PARTY AS IT'S CALLED WHO
DON'T REALLY WANT TO DECLARE
THEIR INTENTIONS.
SO PERHAPS HE MIGHT BE BETTER ON
THE NIGHT BUT THE ANTICIPATION
IS THAT HE WON'T GET ENOUGH TO
FORM A GOVERNMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN YOU SPEAK
TO PEOPLE ON THE STREETS, DO
THEY HAVE A CONCERN ABOUT YOU
KNOW WHAT THIS IS WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN BREXIT TAKES PLACE OR THIS
IS WHAT HAPPENS WHEN PRESIDENT
DONALD TRUMP WINS THE WHITE
HOUSE, THESE ARE THE
CONSEQUENCES, ARE THEY HAVING
ANY THOUGHTS ABOUT THAT, LOOKING
AT WHAT CAN BE AN UPHEAVAL
POLITICALLY IN THE NETHERLANDS
AS WELL?
>> I THINK THE TRUMP EFFECT IS
KIND OF A DOUBLE EDGED SWORD.
HE WANT TO GO WITH REALLY
GRUELING DONALD TRUMP SAYING HE
WAS GOING TO FOLLOW IN HIS
SHOES.
AND WHEN I CAUGHT UP WITH HIM
YESTERDAY AT A RALLY DOWN IN THE
SOUTH OF THE COUNTRY HE IS STILL
TRYING TO DISTANCE HIMSELF.
NOW THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE WHO
BELIEVE BECAUSE OF THE WAY THAT
DONALD TRUMP'S PRESIDENCY HAS
VETTED IN AS IT WERE, NOT WELL
RECEIVED ARE INTERNATIONALLY.
THAT HEIGHT IN HARM WILDERS
RECORDS.
BUT HE IS NOT ON ANY AMERICAN
ISSUES, GOING TO SPECIFICALLY DO
DUTCH ISSUES AND THAT'S WHAT
IT'S ALL ABOUT.
>> Sreenivasan: MALCOLM WHAT
IS THE CENTRAL ISSUE THAT IS
DRIVING PEOPLE TO THE POLLS?
>> WILDERS HAS REALLY MADE THIS
A ONE SUBJECT ISSUE ELECTION.
HE'S BEEN CONCENTRATING ON ISLAM
IMMIGRATION NOTHING ELSE.
THERE WILL BE NO MORE IMMIGRANTS
FROM ISLAMIC COUNTRIES.
HE WILL BAN MOSQUES, BAN THE
KORAN, SO THE ECONOMY HASN'T
REALLY TAKEN -- HASN'T REALLY
TAKEN THE FRONT STAPLE.
THAT HAS UPSET PEOPLE IN THE
LABOR UNIONS, WHO HAVE SEEN
THEIR TAXES GO UP BENEFITS SLASH
PENSIONS GO DOWN AND THEY ARE
REALIZE CONCERNED THAT THESE
THINGS AREN'T BEING DISCUSSED.
LABOR UNIONS MAY POSSIBLY
SUPPORT WILDERS AS A PROTEST
VOTE BECAUSE THEY ARE FED UP
WITH THE POLITICIAN HE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MALCOLM BRABANT JOINING US FROM
A BUSY THOROUGHFARE IN THE
NETHERLANDS, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST WEEK, THE
ANTI-SECRECY GROUP "WIKILEAKS"
PUBLISHED THOUSANDS OF FILES
PURPORTEDLY DESCRIBING HOW THE
CIA HACKS INTO COMPUTER SERVERS,
SMARTPHONES, AND TV'S CONNECTED
TO THE INTERNET.
THE DISCLOSURES ARE ANOTHER
REMINDER OF THE SENSITIVITY OF
GOVERNMENT SECRETS AND HOW
CONTROVERSIAL THEY CAN BE,
ESPECIALLY IN THE WHITE HOUSE.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE ACTIONS TAKEN
BY THE GEORGE W. BUSH
ADMINISTRATION IN THE AFTERMATH
OF THE SEPTEMBER 11, 2001,
TERRORIST ATTACKS, WERE,
ACCORDING TO AUTHOR MARY GRAHAM,
A RECALIBRATION OF THE ROLE OF
SECRECY IN OPEN GOVERNMENT.
A PRESIDENT WHO CHAMPIONED
LIMITED GOVERNMENT APPROVED THE
SECRET DETENTION OF FOREIGN
TERRORIST SUSPECTS AND THE
EAVESDROPPING ON PHONE CALLS OF
AMERICAN CITIZENS.
>> WHEN HIS DETENTION POLICIES
AND INTERROGATION POLICIES AND
SURVEILLANCE POLICIES BEGAN TO
BE REVEALED, THIS WAS THEN A FEW
YEARS LATER, I THOUGHT THERE
MUST BE SOME GROUND RULES.
THERE MUST BE A LAW THAT TELLS
US WHAT A PRESIDENT CAN DO
BEHIND CLOSED DOORS IN AN
EMERGENCY.
BUT IT TURNED OUT THERE REALLY
WERE NO LAWS.
ONE THING ABOUT OUR SYSTEM OF
GOVERNANCE THAT MAKES SECRECY SO
INTERESTING IS THAT THERE'S
REALLY NO WAY THAT TO STOP A
PRESIDENT FROM DOING SOMETHING
ILLEGAL, UNETHICAL, OR JUST
PLAIN FOOLISH BEHIND CLOSED
DOORS.
>> Reporter: IN HER NEW BOOK,"
PRESIDENTS' SECRETS: THE USE
AND ABUSE OF HIDDEN POWER,"
GRAHAM FINDS MODERN PRESIDENTIAL
SECRECY IS PARAMOUNT IN
QUESTIONS OF NATIONAL SECURITY,
FROM THE COLD WAR TO THE WAR ON
TERROR.
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION CAME IN
WITH A FIRM COMMITMENT THAT THEY
COULD MOVE THINGS QUICKLY
THROUGH GOVERNMENT AND THEN THEY
HAVE THE CRISIS OF 9/11.
AND THIS SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGED
THE WAY THAT THEY USED
INFORMATION AND USED SECRECY.
>> IT'S ONLY IN THE HARD TIMES
WHEN THE PRESIDENT HAS TO FACE
THESE VALUES-- THE CONFLICT
BETWEEN VALUES THAT WE CHERISH,
THAT YOU SEE A PRESIDENT'S TRUE
CHARACTER.
SO I THINK THAT THESE ARE THE
TIMES WHEN WE NEED TO PAY
ATTENTION TO WHAT DECISIONS THE
PRESIDENT MAKES ABOUT OPENNESS
AND SECRECY.
>> Reporter: WHEN PRESIDENT
BARACK OBAMA TOOK OVER, HE
DECLASSIFIED MEMOS USED TO
JUSTIFY HARSH INTERROGATIONS OF
POST 9/11 TERROR SUSPECTS, AND
HE CREATED A NATIONAL
DECLASSIFICATION CENTER FOR
OLDER GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS.
BUT WIKILEAKS AND SELF-DESCRIBED
WHISTLEBLOWER, EDWARD SNOWDEN,
PREVENTED THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION FROM CONCEALING
DETAILS ABOUT ELECTRONIC
SURVEILLANCE, DRONE STRIKES, AND
OFFENSIVE CYBER WEAPONS.
WHAT WAS IT LIKE COMING TO THE
FINISH LINE OF YOUR BOOK TOWARD
THE END OF THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION THINKING THAT WE
HAVE JUST NOW TAPPED INTO A
WHOLE NEW CHAPTER OF INFORMATION
AND SECRECY, PARTICULARLY THE
WAYS IN WHICH THE DIGITAL AGE
ARE TRANSFORMING THE WHOLE
LANDSCAPE?
>> SECRECY DOESN'T WORK IN THE
DIGITAL AGE.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER,
CONTROVERSIAL SECRETS AND BIG
CONTROVERSIAL SECRETS COME OUT
THESE DAYS.
AND IT'S MUCH HARDER TO KEEP
ANYTHING HIDDEN FOR VERY LONG.
AND WHAT ENDS UP HAPPENING IS
THAT THE PRESIDENT CEDES
LEADERSHIP TO HIS OPPONENTS AND
TO THE MEDIA.
AND THEREFORE IS WEAKENED IN THE
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: A CO-FOUNDER OF
HARVARD'S TRANSPARENCY POLICY
PROJECT, GRAHAM FINDS OUR
DEMOCRACY'S DELICATE BALANCE
BETWEEN OPENNESS AND SECRECY
DATES BACK TO COUNTRY'S
FOUNDING.
YOU WRITE, "IN DEMOCRACY,
SECRECY CANNOT LAST FOREVER."
AND YET, OUR GOVERNMENT, THE
REPRESENTATIVE FORM WE SO OFTEN
CELEBRATE, WAS RATHER SHOCKINGLY
BORN OUT OF UNPLANNED SECRECY.
>> THAT'S SO TRUE.
SO THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
WAS HELD BEHIND CLOSED DOORS.
THE DELEGATES CERTAINLY FELT
THAT IT HAD TO BE HELD BEHIND
CLOSED DOORS BECAUSE THEY HAD
BEEN ASKED BY CONGRESS ONLY TO
TWEAK WHAT WERE THEN CALLED THE
ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION.
AND ONCE THEY DECIDED THAT THEY
WOULD CONSIDER AN ENTIRELY
DIFFERENT FORM OF GOVERNMENT, IT
REALLY WAS AN ILLICIT MEETING IN
A GOOD CAUSE, BUT STILL AN
ILLICIT MEETING.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK HAD
THE DISCUSSION TAKEN PLACE OUT
IN THE OPEN IT WOULD HAVE
ALTERED OUR NATIONAL TRAJECTORY
AND ESSENTIALLY OUR IDENTITY?
>> YOU KNOW, THE CONSENSUS OF
HISTORIANS SEEMS TO BE THAT IT
WOULD NOT HAVE RESULTED IN AN
AGREEMENT ON A CONSTITUTION IF
THE PROCESS HAD BEEN OPEN.
>> Reporter: EVEN GEORGE
WASHINGTON, A CHAMPION OF
GOVERNMENT TRANSPARENCY,
SUFFERED HIS GREATEST POLITICAL
CRISIS AS PRESIDENT, WHEN HE HID
THE TERMS OF A TREATY WITH
BRITAIN.
ONE OF THE BEST KEPT
PRESIDENTIAL SECRETS IN U.S.
HISTORY OCCURRED IN 1919, WHEN
PRESIDENT WOODROW WILSON
SUFFERED A STROKE.
>> IT WOULD NEVER HAPPEN NOW,
WHAT HAPPENED WITH WILSON, WHICH
WAS HE WAS ABLE TO KEEP AN
INCAPACITATING STROKE SECRET FOR
A YEAR-AND-A-HALF.
BUT DURING MUCH OF THAT TIME, HE
WAS STILL QUITE WEAK BUT WHAT
BECAME THE BIGGEST PROBLEM FOR
THE COUNTRY IS THAT HE BECAME
IRRATIONAL.
>> Reporter: BUT GRAHAM SAYS, IT
WASN'T UNTIL THE COLD WAR, THAT
SECRECY BECAME
INSTITUTIONALIZED.
AS SHE TELLS IT, HARRY TRUMAN'S
CREATION OF THE CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY ORIGINATED
SIMPLY WITH A QUEST FOR A
CONVENIENT DELIVERY OF
INFORMATION.
>> ON HIS DESK EVERY MORNING,
THERE WERE STACKS AND STACKS OF
MILITARY CABLES, WHICH WAS THE
BEST EFFORT AT THE TIME TO GIVE
HIM INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT WAS
GOING ON IN THE WORLD.
BUT HE FOUND THEM VERY
FRUSTRATING.
SO WHAT HE ASKED AN AIDE TO DO
WHICH SEEMED VERY SIMPLE AT THE
TIME WAS JUST TO FORM A SMALL
GROUP IN THE WHITE HOUSE THAT
WOULD DIGEST THOSE CABLES AND
GIVE HIM A FEW TYPE-WRITTEN
PAGES EVERY MORNING TELLING HIM
WHAT WAS THE IMPORTANT
INTELLIGENCE.
AND SO HE BORROWED 15 EMPLOYEES
FROM ELSEWHERE IN THE GOVERNMENT
AND HE CALLED THAT THE CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE GROUP.
>> Reporter: LESS THAN TWO YEARS
LATER, THIS GROUP, WHICH HAD
EVOLVED INTO WHAT IS NOW CALLED
THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,
HAD BEEN GRANTED THE RIGHT TO
KEEP ITS SPENDING SECRET AND
OPERATE WITH LITTLE OVERSIGHT.
>> AS HARRY TRUMAN SAID LATER,
IT WAS NEVER SUPPOSED TO BE A
CLOAK AND DAGGER OPERATION.
THEY WERE JUST SUPPOSED TO
GATHER INTELLIGENCE.
SO THEY WERE GATHERING
INTELLIGENCE.
BUT FROM A VERY EARLY STAGE,
THEY WERE ALSO CONDUCTING THESE
COVERT OPERATIONS THAT INVOLVED
BRIBING FOREIGN OFFICIALS.
LATER ON BY THE '60S, IT
INVOLVED ASSASSINATION PLOTS AND
SURVEILLANCE OF AMERICANS, EVEN
THOUGH IT WAS NOT, THE C.I.A.
WAS NOT SUPPOSED TO BE IN THAT
BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: WITH VIETNAM AND
WATERGATE, LYNDON JOHNSON AND
RICHARD NIXON HAD TWO OF THE
MORE NOTABLY SECRETIVE
ADMINISTRATIONS.
IRONICALLY, AS A SENATOR,
JOHNSON FOUGHT FOR INCREASED
PRESIDENTIAL TRANSPARENCY.
BUT IN THE WHITE HOUSE, HE
WORKED TO WATER DOWN THE BILL
THAT BECAME THE FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION ACT, WHICH GIVES
JOURNALISTS AND THE PUBLIC
GREATER ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT
DOCUMENTS.
AND WHILE NIXON'S BACK CHANNEL
NEGOTIATIONS LED TO NORMALIZING
U.S. RELATIONS WITH CHINA, THE
REVELATION OF HIS SECRET TAPE
RECORDINGS DISCUSSING THE
WATERGATE BREAK-IN FORCED HIM TO
RESIGN.
THIS WAS ALL BEFORE 24/7 CABLE
NEWS, THE INTERNET, AND SOCIAL
MEDIA.
A CONSTANT PART OF A 21ST
CENTURY PRESIDENCY.
IT SEEMS NEARLY EVERY, SINGLE
DAY THERE'S A NEW REVELATION
THAT'S COME VIA AN ANONYMOUS
SOURCE OR A LEAK.
>> SO EVERY PRESIDENT GETS MAD
ABOUT LEAKS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WAS MAD ABOUT
LEAKS.
PRESIDENT BUSH WAS MAD ABOUT
GEORGE WASHINGTON WAS MAD ABOUT
LEAKS.
THERE'S ONE THING TO REMEMBER
ABOUT LEAKS, AND THAT IS LEAKERS
ONLY HAVE POWER IF THE PRESIDENT
GIVES THEM POWER.
THE PRESIDENT CAN STOP LEAKS IN
A NANOSECOND BY SIMPLY
DISCLOSING INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: A PANEL OF
FEDERAL JUDGES IN TEXAS IS
ORDERING THE STATE OF TEXAS TO
REDRAW THE STATE'S CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT MAP, BECAUSE IT
INTENTIONALLY DISCRIMINATED
AGAINST HISPANIC VOTERS.
THE JUDGES RULED FRIDAY THAT IN
2011, REPUBLICAN STATE
LEGISLATORS ENGAGED IN RACIAL
GERRYMANDERING BY DILUTING
HISPANIC VOTING STRENGTH
IN TWO REPUBLICAN-HELD DISTRICTS
AND BY PACKING HISPANIC VOTERS
INTO A NEIGHBORING DISTRICT.
THE RULING, AND ANOTHER PENDING
CASE OVER TEXAS'S STRICT PHOTO
VOTER ID LAW, RAISE QUESTIONS
ABOUT HOW THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
AND SUPREME COURT WILL HANDLE
VOTING RIGHTS.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THAT
IS REPORTER REID WILSON FROM
"THE HILL."
>> TO EXPLAIN WHAT HAPPENED IN
THESE TWO DISTRICTS.
>> THERE'S THIS TERM CALLED
PACKING AND CRACKING.
AND ESSENTIALLY WHAT THE COURT
SAID TO THE TEXAS LEGISLATURE
DID WAS THEY PACKED HISPANIC
VOTERS INTO ONE DISTRICT THAT
CENTERED AROUND AUSTIN AND THEY
CRACKED THOSE VOTERS APART IN
DIFFERENT COMMUNITIES.
THEY DIVIDED SIMILAR COMMUNITIES
IN ANOTHER DISTRICT ON THE EAST
COAST OF TEXAS AND A THIRD
DISTRICT THAT RUNS ALONG THE
TEXAS-MEXICO BORDER.
THIS IS ALL PART OF A PATTERN
THAT PARTIES ENGAGE IN, IN
STATES THINK CONTROL STATE
LEGISLATURES IN HOPES OF
BUILDING MORE SAFE REPUBLICAN
DISTRICTS AND IN CEMENTING THEIR
MAJORITY IN THE U.S. HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
>> THERE USED TO BE COMMUNITIES
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WOULD
MONITOR AND SAY HEY YOU'VE GOT A
HISTORY OF BAD VOTING PRACTICES.
WE WANT TO GET IN THERE.
THAT WAS KIND OF LIFTED BY THE
SUPREME COURT, WHAT HAPPENS THIS
THAT CASE NOW?
>> WHAT WE SEE VOTING RIGHTS
DOING NOW IS CHALLENGING
THESE GERRYMANDERS, UNDER
SECTION 2 OF THE VOTING RIGHTS
ACT, THAT REQUIRES THEM TO PROVE
THAT THE -- WHOEVER IS MAKING
THESE LAWS THAT ARE INVOLVING
ELECTION PROCEDURES, ARE DOING
SO WITH A RACIALLY
DISCRIMINATORY INTENT.
AND THE COURT SAID THAT'S WHAT
THE TEXAS LEGISLATURE DID IN
THIS CASE.
NOW REDISTRICTING CASES ARE
SPECIAL IN THAT ANY TIME THEY
ARE APPEALED, A DECISION AT A
DISTRICT COURT LEVEL IS APPEALED
THEY WILL GO DIRECTLY TO THE
SUPREME COURT.
SO IF THE STATE OF TEXAS DECIDES
TO APPEAL AND THEY MOST
CERTAINLY WILL WE'LL GET AN
ISSUE SUCH AS THIS BEFORE THE
SUPREME COURT IN THE NEXT COUPLE
OF YEARS.
>> THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, LED
BY JEFF SESSIONS, WHERE DO THEY
WEIGH IN?
>> THAT HAS A LOT OF CIVIL
RIGHTS GROUPS UNHAPPY THAT
ESSENTIALLY THEY'RE NOT GOING TO
HAVE THE WEIGHT OF THE OBAMA
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT BEHIND THEM
IN THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE
REPERCUSSIONS FOR OTHER
GERRYMANDERED DISTRICTS AROUND
THE COUNTRY?
>> WE HAVE SEEN THE COURTS RULE
IN A FEW CASES MOST NOTABLY
VIRGINIA, WHERE THE HOUSE PICKED
UP A SEAT AFTER THE COURT FOUND
THOSE DISTRICTS WERE IMPROPERLY
DRAWN AND IN CASES SUCH AS NORTH
CAROLINA INVOLVING VOTER I.D.
CHANGES IN STATES LIKE ARIZONA
AND TEXAS AS WE HAVE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT AND FLORIDA AND
SOME OTHER STATES TOO.
SO THIS IS VERY MUCH AN ACTIVE
LEGAL BATTLEFIELD AND ONE THAT'S
GOING TO EVOLVE OVER THE NEXT
FEW YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: REID WILSON
FROM THE HILL THANKS SO MUCH.
A REMINDER TO TUNE INTO THE
NewsHOUR TOMORROW, JUDY
WOODRUFF INTERVIEWERS FORMER
VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE ABOUT THE
NATION'S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES
AND POLITICAL DIVIDE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.